You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor Dr. Bob McCartney.
Let's open our Bibles this morning to Ecclesiastes chapter two verse one.
All right.
Excited that our students are here this morning.
I love that.
Hey,
I want to welcome those of you at Shepherd Campus, West Campus and 11 o'clock East.
Glad that you're here this morning as well as those of you who join us on social media or on television.
So glad that you guys are here.
The golden age of Hollywood is generally considered to be the years between when talkies started, when movies moved from silent movies to movies with voice and sound.
all the way to about 1960 with the advent of television, when television kind of became the primary means of entertainment.
But during the golden age of Hollywood, movie stars were like larger than life.
They were seen as heroic.
They were the biggest stars and the biggest celebrities in the world and certainly in America.
And among those was a guy named Errol Flynn.
Errol Flynn starred in dozens of movies.
Most famously known, one on Oscar IV, The Adventures of Robin Hood.
Another movie he did called The Charge of the Light Brigade was very, very famous.
And he started dozens of movies.
And his on-screen persona was always one of self-assured, bold confidence.
But off the screen, when the cameras shut down, Errol Flynn was really not that way at all.
As a matter of fact, he had a lot of questions about life and so many questions that that singular symbol, a question mark, was something that he carried with him all the time.
He had it embroidered on his or monogrammed on his shirt cuffs.
It was in the lining of his jackets.
There was a little question mark sewn inside.
The state of California issued him a very special license plate for one of his sports cars
That was a question mark.
That was the entire license plate.
No letters, no numbers, just a question mark.
And he was asked about it once.
Why is it that the question mark is like your symbol?
And his basic response was that I'm always asking myself, is there more?
Is this all there is?
I would say to you that the questions
that Errol Flynn were asking maybe out loud and with that symbol are the questions that a lot of people in this room are asking.
A lot of people in our culture are certainly asking, is this all there is?
Is there more?
What is the real meaning for life?
And that's what Solomon is really digging in on in Ecclesiastes.
We learned last time we were together that Solomon is going to use a couple of phrases that are incredibly important for our understanding of this book.
One of them is when he repeatedly talks about life, quote, under the sun, end quote.
He's talking about life from a strictly earthbound perspective with no thought of God or eternity when you look at life on a horizontal plane alone.
And then there's another word that he uses over and over and over in this book.
He's going to use it over 30 times.
The word in Hebrew is evil.
It is translated in my translation, futility.
Some translations call it vanity.
But it simply means that it's something that cannot bear weight.
It's something that doesn't have meaning.
It's real, just like that
breath that when you breathed out when you walked outside this morning and you could see your breath.
It's real, it's there, but it can't bear weight.
It doesn't really matter and it doesn't last for any length of time.
Solomon says, when you look at life under the sun, it is evil, it is futility.
It is matter without meaning.
And that's what we're going to explore today because
When we look at life in 2026, we're asking a lot of the same questions that Solomon asked 3,000 years ago.
When you look at life through the lens of social media and you see what really isn't other people's lives, it's their carefully curated highlight reel.
And you begin to question your own life choices in light of that.
You're like,
Why did I marry this person?
Why did I choose this career?
Why didn't I go down this path?
You begin to ask yourself questions about really deep meaning in life.
And so this morning we're gonna turn back to Solomon.
Now remember that the Bible tells us that Solomon wrote this.
The author says that he is David's son and he is king in Jerusalem.
There's only one person that really fits that description
and that is Solomon.
And Solomon we know had a great gift from God and that gift was wisdom.
God showed up in Solomon's bedroom one night and said, ask me for anything you want.
Now I'm going to tell you, that's a pretty cool deal.
If God wakes you up in the middle of the night and says, ask me for anything you want and I'll give it to you.
That's not a bad deal.
God gives you a blank check.
Solomon asked for wisdom.
And God says, because you've asked me for wisdom, I'm going to give you some of the other stuff too.
So he blessed Solomon with tremendous wealth.
And Solomon has all of this wealth and all of this wisdom.
And yet at some point in his life, I think Solomon gets bored.
He just gets bored.
He comes to a place in his life where he says, I'm going to explore some other avenues.
Now I believe Ecclesiastes was written later in Solomon's life.
He writes song of songs when he's young and head over heels romantically in love.
Read it.
He writes proverbs in his middle age, I think when he's raising teenagers.
And he repeatedly gives, he says, my son, give heed to wisdom.
It's like he's a father trying to impart to his
son, how to live life in a way that is pleasing and honoring God.
But Ecclesiastes is a book later in life.
And later in life Solomon begins to look around at all that he's accumulated and all that he's achieved and all that he has, and he finds it all just to be evil.
The word in the Hebrew, futility.
And so Solomon,
decides to run a couple of experiments.
And today we're going to talk about two of the experiments that he ran.
And when you hear what they are, you're going to go, well, man, Solomon was the wisest man ever.
He should know them better than that.
And yet 3000 years later, with all of our technology, some of you in this room are still running these experiments.
You still think that you're going to get a different result than Solomon did.
So we're gonna work our way through chapter two, and we're gonna begin with his first experiment.
Here's the first experiment that he ran.
He discovered that amusement cannot fill the emptiness of our souls.
Amusement and entertainment and pleasure cannot fill the emptiness of our souls.
Look at Ecclesiastes chapter two, verse one.
I said to myself, go ahead, I will test you with pleasure.
Enjoy what is good.
But it turned out to be futile.
I said about laughter.
It is madness and about pleasure.
What does this accomplish?
I explored with my mind the pull of wine on my body.
My mind still guiding me with wisdom.
and how to grasp folly until I could see what is good for people to do under heaven during the few days of their life.
The first test that Solomon runs is the pleasure test.
He says, I am going to plunge into entertainment, to amusement, and to pleasure.
And surely I will find the meaning of life there.
This is what philosophers call the philosophy of hedonism.
Hedonism is the belief that the highest good in life is personal pleasure and the avoidance of pain.
Now you could write that word hedonism over much of America 2026.
We are in constant pursuit of pleasure.
We are in constant pursuit of the next high.
We are in constant pursuit of what will soothe us, what will entertain us, what will amuse us.
We are constantly running after it.
We want the next high.
We want the next experience.
And that's what Solomon says that he does.
Now when some people who've studied this before hear the word hedonism,
What they hear is sort of a reckless abandon to the wildest party in the most drunken scenes and drug infused sort of highs and just kind of plunging them into all kinds of hedonistic pleasures.
They see debauchery basically.
But hedonism doesn't just mean recklessness.
It means a restlessness.
It means living for pleasure day after day believing that
Feeling good is the highest aim of life.
So Solomon says, I pursued, first of all, he uses a couple of words that we would associate and the Bible would associate with pleasure.
He uses the word laughter.
Now, in the ancient world, when a king wanted to be amused, essentially what they did was for amusement, they would bring in a court jester, think comedian.
And that comedian could be anything from someone who told jokes.
You certainly wouldn't tell one at the king's expense, but you might tell jokes or they might be jugglers or they might be sort of sleight of hand magic acts or those sort of things that amused the king and the members of his court.
So Solomon says, I pursued laughter.
And he says of laughter, I said, it's madness.
It's just madness.
It's meaninglessness.
And then he says, I explored with my mind the pull of wine on my body, and wine is associated with pleasure.
It is associated with the party.
Solomon says, I pursued all of this.
And he said, it was all folly.
Listen to him down in verse 10, just skip over a few verses and we'll come back to some of the others.
But he says in verse 10, Now here's what we know.
God blesses us.
with all things richly to enjoy.
The things that you have, God wants you to enjoy them.
There is nothing wrong with enjoyment.
If you do it with an attitude that God has granted me this opportunity, this lake house or this place in Colorado or this beach house or this car or this vacation, if you say, you know what, God has blessed me with this and I'm going to enjoy it, that's fine.
That's not living for pleasure.
But Solomon says, I'm going to live for pleasure, and while pleasure can produce moments of delight, and it can.
It cannot produce meaning.
There is no depth there.
When it's over, it's over.
When the trip to the amusement park is over, there isn't really anything lasting except for maybe some joyful memories.
But nothing life-changing happens there.
By the way, the word amusement is an interesting word.
The word amusement means, basically we call amusement parks, amusement parks for this.
You get on a ride at a certain place, it takes you for a little spin and you get off at exactly the same place.
Nothing changed.
The word amusement really does mean that.
By the way, the word entertainment means to hold someone's attention for a long time.
I do not want to amuse you.
I don't mind entertaining you.
I don't want you to get off at the same place you got on.
I'd rather move you somewhere down the road.
But Solomon says to us that life built on chasing the next high is simply unsustainable.
It's not sustainable.
There was a woman named Barbara Hutton
When she was 21 years old, she inherited one of the largest fortunes in all the world.
Back in the early part of the 1900s, the Woolworths department stores were popular.
They were everywhere.
And when the founder of that died, his son had already died.
So his granddaughter, Barbara Hutton, inherited one third of his fortune.
And with that fortune, she became one of the three richest women in all the world at 21 years of age.
She bought a luxury yacht.
She bought a home in Los Angeles.
She bought a home in London.
She had all sorts of treasures.
She bought priceless Chinese Ming vases.
these priceless works of ceramics, and she had all of these treasures and works of art.
She pursued every avenue of pleasure with her life.
Barbara Hutton was married and divorced seven times.
When she died at age 66, at age 66, when she died,
from the effects of an eating disorder, she weighed less than 100 pounds, and she had less than $3,500 in one bank account.
Chasing the next high is unsustainable.
It will not bring meaning into your life.
Amusement will not fill the longing of your soul.
There's also a truth in this
passage that we need to grab on to and that is that there is a diminishing return with amusement.
In other words, the first time you experience something enjoyable it gives you a rush.
And the next time you kind of know what's coming and it doesn't give you as much of a rush.
So in order for your experience of enjoyment
to be maintained, your enjoyment will decrease unless the intensity increases.
Think about this.
When my daughter was little, we would go to amusement parks, and she knew I loved roller coaster, so she wanted to ride the roller coaster.
Now she was too little, you know, they got the little height standard.
She couldn't ride the big coasters, so we'd ride the kiddie coaster, right?
Man, that was fun when she was five.
It was great.
But after you've ridden the kiddie coaster 10 times,
You're kind of done with that.
You got to move up.
So as soon as she could ride, you know, then she met the height standard, we moved up to the next coaster.
And it was kind of the mild adult coaster, but man, that was fun for a while.
It was fantastic for a while.
But even after that, you know, it, that begins to wear off.
So then we got to move up to the next.
We got to move to the coaster that, you know, turns the loops and you got to go to the bigger, faster coaster.
because your experience and enjoyment decreases unless the intensity increases.
That's harmless when it's roller coasters, but when it's sex or drugs or alcohol, it's self-destructive.
Because your enjoyment will decrease unless the intensity increases.
And when it comes to certain things, that's self-destruction.
And that's what Solomon comes
to understand.
There was an author a few years ago, he wrote a book.
The author's name is Neil Postman.
The book was amusing ourselves to death.
When I read this book, it was almost prophetic.
Listen to a couple of quotes from the book that I think are particularly meaningful.
Postman wrote, people will come to adore
the technologies that undo their capacities to think.
People will come to adore the technologies that undo their capacity to think.
Here's another.
When a population becomes distracted by trivia, when cultural life is redefined as a perpetual round of entertainments,
then serious public conversation becomes impossible.
Postman's argument is not that we were going to be overcome by evil.
It's that we were going to be overcome by distractions and pleasure.
Postman was not a Christian, but by the way, he wrote that book in 1985.
41 years ago, Postman prophetically writes,
We will come to adore the technologies.
The technologies that undo our capacity to think.
And that's a summary of where Solomon is.
Amusement will not fill the emptiness of our souls.
So Solomon runs a second experiment.
Achievement cannot fill the emptiness of our souls.
Look at verse four.
I increased my achievements.
I built houses and planted vineyards for myself.
I made gardens and parks for myself and planted every kind of fruit tree in them.
I constructed reservoirs for myself from which to irrigate a grove of flourish trees.
I acquired male and female servants and had slaves who were born in my house.
I also owned livestock, large herds and flocks, more than any who were before me in Jerusalem.
I also am as silver and gold for myself and the treasure of kings and provinces.
I gathered male and female singers for myself and many concubines, the delights of men.
So I became great and surpassed all who were before me in Jerusalem.
My wisdom also remained with me all that my eyes desired.
I did not deny them.
I did not refuse myself any pleasure for I took pleasure in all my
before I took pleasure in all my struggles.
This was my reward for my struggles.
When I considered all that I had accomplished and what I had labored to achieve, I found everything to be, there's that word again, feudal and the pursuit of the wind.
There is nothing to be gained under the sun.
Solomon, he says,
My next test was I'm going to try achievement.
I'm gonna try amassing and acquiring a bunch of stuff.
This is a second philosophy that we are still trying to pursue in American life, 2026.
This is the philosophy of materialism.
Materialism says it's the belief that significance, security, and satisfaction are found in what you build
what you own, what you accumulate or what you accomplish.
Materialism is the philosophy that says he who dies with the most toys wins.
No, he who dies with the most toys is just dead.
That's it.
Materialism is this belief that somehow in what I am mass and what I accumulate and what I achieve somehow makes me who I am.
It is where I find my identity.
Listen to Solomon.
He says, I built houses.
I planted vineyards.
He says, I built gardens and parks.
I even built a reservoir to irrigate all my fruit trees and my flourishing trees.
Now those kind of infrastructure projects.
were the kind of things that kings undertook.
But in the ancient world, this was a massive project.
That's why he probably had to have so many slaves and servants that he talks about.
It was a massive undertaking.
And he says, I did all of these things.
I achieved all of these things.
I accumulated.
I amassed.
And where did it leave me?
He says, I found it all to be futile.
And the pursuit of the wind, it was like trying to catch the wind.
It really didn't fulfill my soul.
It didn't fill the deepest longing in my life.
I was studying this this week and just walking through it over and over and I saw something.
And it just hadn't occurred to me the first few times I read to it.
Maybe you heard it.
Maybe you picked up on it when I read through the passage.
But maybe one of the reasons that Solomon didn't find so much fulfillment in all these achievements was because it was all quite self-centered.
Listen to him.
I built houses and planted vineyards for myself.
I made gardens and parks for myself.
Planted every kind of fruit tree in them.
He says, I acquired male and female servants, had slaves who were born in my house, own livestock,
I'm asked silver and gold for myself.
I gathered male and female singers for myself.
There's actually five times in that passage that he says, I did all of this for me.
It's all about me.
And that's where materialism always leads you.
It leads you to believe that somehow you are the center of the universe.
And Solomon fell into a trap that many of us 3,000 years later are still falling into.
He acquires, he accumulates, and he achieves.
And it's all about him, his name and his fame.
Maybe if perhaps there had been a thought of blessing others, maybe if there had been a thought of advancing the kingdom of God and what he was doing, maybe if there had been a thought of giving,
Solomon needed to learn a lesson that we've been trying to learn around here, and that is not everything that comes to me is for me.
And Solomon used all of this massive wealth.
You know how wealthy Solomon was?
Solomon was so wealthy.
The Bible says that Israel was on the gold standard.
Gold was the standard.
And silver, though we would consider that like the second most precious metal, the Bible says in first Kings, chapter 10, verse 27, the king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones.
It was like rocks.
You know, the United States man has decided that we're not making pennies anymore.
They're perceived as worthless.
the copper that it would take to make a penny cost more than a penny.
And that's sort of what Solomon did, but it was with silver.
Silver was viewed like as the rocks on the street.
And Solomon comes to a place where he realizes his achievement cannot deliver something that satisfies his soul.
Occasionally, people will come to understand that.
Scotty Schaeffler,
For the past few years has been the number one golfer, pro golfer in the world.
Won the Masters, won the other major championships.
He was number one on the money leaderboard, like making the most money on the tour.
I mean, he has absolutely been a tremendous success.
Before the British opened last summer, there was a press conference and a reporter asked him a question if he felt
Fulfilled if he if he felt like he had really sort of reached the top and Scottie Schaeffler gave a startling answer to that reporter he said quote This is not a fulfilling life It's fulfilling from the sense of accomplishment But it's not fulfilling from the sense of the deepest places of your heart See Scottie Schaeffler is a Jesus follow
And he's, I believe doing the best he can to keep in balance.
The tremendous success that he has worked for and achieved and been blessed with by God.
And the fact that it will never satisfy his soul.
He went on in that interview to try to clarify that answer.
And he said, you know, when you win a tournament, yeah, you're exhilarated by that in it.
And it brings, you know, happiness to you and you're pumped up about that.
But the next morning you wake up going, what's next?
You know, that's the way we all are.
We all have these goals, and if you accomplish your goal, the next thing you think about is, what do I do next?
Some of us can't even celebrate in the achievement of a goal because we're already moving on to, I gotta do something else, I gotta do something else.
And it is that moment when the truth is we are placing our identity in what we achieve and what we accomplish and what we acquire.
Far too many of us have not learned the lesson of Luke chapter 12.
Jesus tried to teach us this too by the way.
He told a story.
He tells a story about a guy who had a tremendous harvest and he brought in all of this grain and he was blessed.
And there was no thought in his mind about giving to others, about giving to the kingdom of God.
There was no thought there.
He says, here's what I will do.
I will tear down my barns and build bigger ones.
We have bigger barn syndrome.
We always want a bigger barn.
And Jesus said this.
He then told them, watch out, be on your guard against all greed because one's life is not in the abundance of his possessions.
Solomon said, I'm going to try that.
And he came up empty.
He came up sensing that everything is evil.
Everything is futile.
It is devoid of eternal meaning.
So Solomon has run these two experiments.
And now we come to his first conclusions.
There are two things that Solomon says, I learned from this.
There's first of all, some disappointment.
And then there is a direction.
So let me show you what Solomon learned.
The first one is a little unnerving for Christian literature.
It just is.
But look at chapter 2, verse 17.
Solomon says, after I ran the test of the party and pleasure and after I ran the test of accumulating and acquiring hedonism and materialism, here's where I found myself with disappointment in life under the sun.
Therefore, I hated life because the work that was done under the sun was distressing to me for everything is futile in pursuit of the wind.
I hated life.
Now, that's not a suicidal thought on his part.
That is what one author called existential disgust.
He's just disgusted with life.
He's frustrated with life.
There are so many people.
that I talk to as a pastor, that I hear interviews with or read about, and they would say almost the same thing, I hate my life.
I hate my life.
We are living in the midst of the greatest, most prosperous culture that has ever existed on planet Earth.
We have more amusements and distractions, and yet I hate my life.
You could write Ecclesiastes 2.17 over American culture sometimes.
But listen to one of the reasons he hates his life.
Verse 18, I hated all my work that I labored under the sun because I must leave it to another, to the one who comes after me.
And who knows whether he will be wise or a fool.
Yet he will take over all my work that I labored at skillfully under the sun.
This too is futile.
Solomon suddenly comes to a realization.
No matter how much I accumulate, I'm going to leave it all behind.
I'm going to leave it all to my kids and grandkids and they're either going to squander all of it or all these treasures that I've collected.
Some of you make collections.
You got to be these big collections.
You know what your kids are going to do with those?
They're going to sell them at a yard sale for 50 cents a piece.
That's what they're going to do.
I know you think they're precious and your grandkids and your kids are going to want them and they're going to treasure them for it.
No, they're not.
Because they're going to have a house full of stuff too and they don't need your junk.
That's what's going to happen.
And Solomon figured that out.
He finally comes this realization, but it's disappointing to him.
He says, life under the sun is just futile.
But then he comes to a moment of direction.
And this is where there's a glimmer of hope because
I mean, come on, chapter two is kind of dark.
But he comes to this moment, and it's down in verse 24, of direction that there must be more.
Therefore, there is nothing better for a person than to eat and drink and enjoy his work.
I have seen that even this is from God's hand, because who can eat and who can enjoy life apart from him?
Solomon says, rather than constantly pursuing more, perhaps I should just eat and drink and enjoy what God has given to me.
That's not materialism.
That's gift theology.
That is the view that life and the blessings of this life are a gift from God's hands.
When you approach them from that direction, then they make more sense.
And they really have more meaning.
But the last expression there is the one that grabs my attention when he says, who can eat and who can enjoy life apart from him?
He's coming to the answer.
He's not there yet, but he's coming to the answer that it is impossible to find security, satisfaction, and significance
in this life, apart from God.
You have been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, which is all false.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWF.org.
We'll see you next week.